---
content_type: page
is_media_gallery: true
title: Video Lectures
uid: c78ef834-3e31-1e81-99a2-54d6d7d48544
---

Please note: Video is not available for Lecture 13 on X-Ray Diffraction (with Guest Lecturer Peter Mueller).{{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-1-introductory-lecture-to-5" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 1: Introductory Lecture to 5.310" description="Description: In this first lecture, Dr. John Dolhun introduces the teaching team, policies, course format, expectations, grading, and material to be covered during the semester. He also discusses lab notebooks and lab safety rules, then demonstrates a polymer reaction. Instructor: Dr. John Dolhun" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/l1hMkDTg2lg/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-2-the-ferrocene-lecture" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 2: The Ferrocene Lecture" description="Description: The Ferrocene lecture begins with a demonstration of an addition reaction using bacon and bromine gas. Dr. Dolhun then goes over the experiments and reactions leading to the discovery of ferrocene, its structure and properties, and steps for its synthesis in lab. Instructor: Dr. John Dolhun" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/EuVpZmQ5v6A/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-3-writing-up-the-lab-report" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 3: Writing Up the Lab Report" description="Description: Dr. Sarah Hewett discusses how to write a lab report, which is an important component of this course. In addition, knowing how to communicate the science that you do is a crucial skill beyond this course, in research or in any other context. Instructor: Dr. Sarah Hewett" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/J23egLCM2tc/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-4-whats-significant-in-laboratory-measurement-error-analysis-lecture" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 4: Whats Significant in Laboratory Measurement? Error Analysis Lecture" description="Description: In todays lecture, Dr. Hewett discusses whats significant in laboratory measurement, how to take measurements in the lab, how to do calculations, and how to do data analysis when theres a lot of quantitative data, as in the upcoming Charles River lab. Instructor: Dr. Sarah Hewett" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/sV_yiHbMUF8/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-5-ellen-swallow-richards-part-1" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 5: Ellen Swallow Richards, Part 1" description="Description: In this first of three lectures in the Ellen Swallow Richards series, Dr. Dolhun discusses the water quality issues in Cambridges beloved Charles River and the methods students will use to analyze river water samples during the next several lab periods. This lecture focuses on measuring dissolved phosphates and phosphorous, significant pollutants for many rivers and lakes. Instructor: Dr. John Dolhun" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/OQq7qH74T5E/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-6-ellen-swallow-richards-part-2" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 6: Ellen Swallow Richards, Part 2" description="Description: In this second of three lectures in the Ellen Swallow Richards series, Dr. Dolhun discusses dissolved oxygen (DO) as a key measurement of the health of a river. He discusses temperature, solubility, and % saturation of DO. He goes over the process for collecting water samples and analyzing them for dissolved oxygen. Instructor: Dr. John Dolhun" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/-l9SfGuZJYE/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-7-ellen-swallow-richards-part-3" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 7: Ellen Swallow Richards, Part 3" description="Description: Dr. Dolhun begins the final lecture of the Ellen Swallow Richards series with an electrifying demo on ionized gas molecules, or, plasma. He then covers Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) for measuring trace elements in samples and Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy for analyzing mercury in samples. Instructor: Dr. John Dolhun" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/JIw9mnVeFig/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-8-essential-oils-part-1" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 8: Essential Oils, Part 1" description="Description: Following a brief re-cap of the Charles River Lab results, Dr. Hewett introduces the next unit, essential oils. After an overview of their history, properties, and structures, she then covers what the class will do for the essential oils lab experiment. Instructor: Dr. Sarah Hewett" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/LNCLrmAvSlU/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-9-essential-oils-part-2" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 9: Essential Oils, Part 2" description="Description: In the second lecture of the Essential Oils series, Dr. Hewett goes over the methods they will use to characterize their products of distillation. These methods include refractometry, gas chromatography, infrared spectroscopy, and polarimetry. Instructor: Dr. Sarah Hewett" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/sukzgrxfSx8/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-10-fischer-esterification" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 10: Fischer Esterification" description="Description: Dr. Hewett talks about characteristics and properties of esters, and goes over the upcoming lab. Students will synthesize esters by doing an acid catalyzed addition of an alcohol and a carboxylic acid, known as the Fischer Esterification reaction. Instructor: Dr. Sarah Hewett" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/oc7sODbVGuA/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-11-catalase-part-1" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 11: Catalase, Part 1" description="Description: In this lecture, Dr. Hewett introduces the catalase lab. Students will use the catalase enzyme in a decomposition reaction of hydrogen peroxide. Then they will determine the order of the reaction, write a rate law, and calculate the activation energy. Instructor: Dr. Sarah Hewett" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/TgrNa_Guigs/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-12-catalase-acid-part-2" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 12: Catalase Acid Part 2" description="Description: Dr. Hewett begins with an overview of the catalase reaction mechanism. Then she discusses the second part of the catalase lab, where the students will quantify the amount of catalase in a sample and determine the amount of iron centers in the catalase. Instructor: Dr. Sarah Hewett" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/yiSZecIWBIc/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-14-mass-spectroscopy-esterification" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 14: Mass Spectroscopy Esterification, Part 2" description="Description: The mass spectroscopy lecture starts with a demonstration, burning a tungsten filament in air and liquid nitrogen. Dr. Dolhun then discusses mass spectroscopy and how it can determine the molecular weights of different types of compounds. He also explains several techniques for ionization and different types of Mass Spectrometers. He ends with evaluating a traditional electron impact mass spectrum. Instructor: Dr. John J. Dolhun" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/dgRLgf4oO2s/default.jpg" >}} {{< video-gallery-item href="/resources/lecture-15-nmr-spectroscopy-esterification" section="Video Lectures" title="Lecture 15: NMR Spectroscopy Esterification Lecture, Part 3" description="Description: John Grimes, from MIT Chemistrys Instrumentation Facility, talks to the class about NMR Spectroscopy. He discusses the parts of an NMR instrument, the analytical technique of NMR, how to measure the signal, and how to interpret the data. Instructor: John Grimes" thumbnail="https://img.youtube.com/vi/Ea2YTXJrhkM/default.jpg" >}}